---
title: Loose Moose Hanging Loose on the Palouse
date: 2025-03-28
tags: ["moose","wildlife","newspapers"]
subtitle: 
cover-image: lumber2516
categories: []
author: Zoe Stave
---

University of Idaho. A campus of beautiful scenery, blue skies, and surrounded by nature and its creatures. 

Although, lately, it seems like that nature is getting a little closer than we are used to. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2516" %}


Over the last couple of weeks, two moose have been enjoying our campus; presumably a mother and calf. Some have even named the mother moose "Regina".  Favoring the admin lawn, the two adventurous ungulates have been making themselves at home and comfortable snacking on various trees and shrubbery. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2515" %}


However, on Wednesday March 26th, our hooved friends made the trip down to the ISUB to snack on some bushes and trees. The security detail for the moose have been working diligently, day in and day out, to keep both humans and moose safe. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2517" %}


Moose have visited University of Idaho's campus and Moscow many times before over the years. In 1997, a "Moose was on the loose" in Moscow. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2513" %}

In 2012, the Argonaut wrote about the visiting, gangly moose to campus: 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2514" %}

In February 2021, ArborNotes noted a family of moose visiting the arboretum, a favorite spot for our local moose friends and humans alike. 


{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2512" %}


The VandalAlert system notifies students of any moose on campus. Here is a recent email: 

**If you see a moose** 
- If you are engaged in a conversation, keep your voice low, talk calmly and back away. Give the moose about 50 feet of personal space.
- If you have a dog with you, leash your dog and keep it back. 
- Never get between a mother (cow) and her calf. 
- Don't yell, throw things or offer food. 
- Be aware of aggressive behavior such as ears laid back, hair raised on hump (or "hackles"), grunting or stomping feet. 
- Don't attempt to take a selfie with the moose. 
	
**If the moose attacks** 
- Get behind a tree, rock, fence or car -- anything to separate you from the moose. 
- Moose often fight with their front hooves. If the moose hits you, play dead, curled up with your hands on head and neck. A backpack may make a good shield. 


I bet the previous students of our university never would have expected the advice of "Don't attempt to take a selfie with the moose"!


{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2518" %}


Remember, while moose may be gangly, cuddly, and cute, maintain a safe and respectable distance, and observe security officer's warnings. Moose, when on the loose, can be easily spooked by sudden movements, sounds, and other animals. Respect the moose!

Sources: 

"Moose on loose." Argonaut, October 19, 2012, 4 [https://objects.lib.uidaho.edu/argonaut/pdf/arg-2012-10-19.pdf](https://objects.lib.uidaho.edu/argonaut/pdf/arg-2012-10-19.pdf).

"Message from the President." ArborNotes, February, 2021, 4 [https://objects.lib.uidaho.edu/arbornotes/arbornotes59.pdf](https://objects.lib.uidaho.edu/arbornotes/arbornotes59.pdf). 

"Moose Loose in Moscow." Argonaut, June 18, 1997, 1 [https://objects.lib.uidaho.edu/argonaut/pdf/arg-1997-06-18.pdf](https://objects.lib.uidaho.edu/argonaut/pdf/arg-1997-06-18.pdf). 

