---
title: Unconventional Tunes
date: 2024-04-16
tags: []
subtitle: Unique Instruments from the International Jazz Collection
cover-image: lumber2291
categories: []
author: Ariana Burns
---

As part of the Lionel Hampton Jazz Festival this week, the University of Idaho Library has a display on the second floor celebrating musical instruments, particularly the handmade items in Special Collections and Archives.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2291" width="75" %}

The Jazz Festival is a well-known tradition on our campus, enjoyed by a broad audience year after year. Far fewer people know about the International Jazz Collection, however, which is preserved here in the University Library. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2293" width="50" %}

For decades, the festival leaders collected papers, photographs, audio and visual materials, and artifacts from jazz legends. Quietly but steadily, the collection grew into the leading jazz archive in the Pacific Northwest.  

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2299" width="75" %}

Some of the most interesting and engaging items in the International Jazz Collection are instruments played by or gifted to prominent artists like Dizzy Gillespie and Benny Carter.  

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2294;lumber2295" width="75" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2298;lumber2296" width="75" %}

These archival objects help illustrate stories about the cultural influences, the creativity, and the resourcefulness of remarkable musicians. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2297" width="50" %}

The display will remain up after Jazz Festival through the semester. Please stop by and see these amazing artifacts.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2292" width="50" %}

# Resources

MG 23 [Lionel Hampton Jazz Festival Office records and Collection on Jazz, 1940-2023](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv700605)

IJC MG 001: [Lionel Hampton papers](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv46578)

There are also a variety of jazz related [digital collections](https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/digital/collections.html#Jazz) available to peruse. 

