---
title: Hats Off to Our Graduates!
date: 2024-04-28
tags: ["commencement","graduates"]
subtitle: 
cover-image: lumber2311
categories: []
author: Ariana Burns
---

Spring commencement is fast approaching, a special gathering for members of our University of Idaho community before they head off on their next adventure as alumni. The university graduation ceremony is a tradition that harkens back to 12th century European universities. The robe, hood, and cap, known collectively as regalia, were introduced then and have been modified over the years. 

The stylish mortar board cap that graduates wear was derived from a Roman round skullcap with a square of fabric on top (Canterbury). From there it adopted traits from both ecclesiastical and secular caps. In 1909 the act of moving the tassel from right to left was added. This change took the place of hooding the baccalaureate recipients (Academic). In more recent decades, graduates began making use of the empty space on top of the cap to personalize it.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2300" width="50" %}

Folklorist Sheila Bock took note of the decorated mortar boards and began studying the designs and the people who made them. Ostenibily to help family and friends identify their graduate in a sea of robes, it is also an opportunity for self expression.

*I came to recognize [that decorated caps] while seemingly “trivial,” were in fact engaging with serious issues surrounding higher education in the United States, issues including belonging, citizenship, and the promises of the American Dream* (Interview). 

She has traced mortar board decoration for American commencement ceremonies to the 1960s.

Some U of I graduates have added to their mortar boards or substituted them completely with another head covering. Photographs taken of these caps by the campus' Photo Services unit date back to the 1970s. Here are a sampling of students and their caps taken over the years by university photographers.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2309;lumber2314" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2303;lumber2302" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2305;lumber2304" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2306;lumber2307" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2310;lumber2312" %} 

*The New York Times* reported that mortar board cap decorating has even become a cottage industry with artists doing the work for students. At the U of I, it isn't necessary to contract out. The Library's makers space, the MILL will be hosting a cap decorating workshop on May 1, 2024, 12:30p-4p:

*Whether you want to incorporate your major, shout out to your favorite professors, or express your personal motto, our workshop empowers you to tell your story through an eye-catching and memorable graduation cap design.*

Below are some creations made at past workshops.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2315;lumber2319" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2318;lumber2316" %}

Swing by the MILL!

# Resources

Bock, Sheila. [Performing the Personal in a State of Transition: Decorated Mortarboards](https://jfepublications.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/bock-from-JFE2014Vol1reducedsize-8.pdf), Journal of Folklore and Education (2014: Vol 1.).

[Intercollegiate Registry of Academic Costume](https://intercollegiate-registry.org/information-about-academic-caps/)

[Interview with Sheila Bock on the Release of "Claiming Space"](https://cfs.osu.edu/news/interview-sheila-bock-release-claiming-space), Center for *Folklore Studies*, November 8, 2023.

[PG 138 Printing and Design Services Photographs collection, 1962-1995](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv421379)

[PG 55 Publications Department photographs, 1967-1987](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv421379)

Simon, Rachel. ["Don't Toss These Grad Caps!"](
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/10/style/graduation-cap-decorating-design.html) *New York Times*, 10 May 2023.

[University of Canterbury graduation history](https://www.canterbury.ac.nz/study/study-support-info/study-topics/graduation)
