---
title: Imagining Costumes
date: 2024-10-28
tags: ["costume","theatre","Idaho"]
subtitle: 
cover-image: lumber2416
categories: []
author: Ariana Burns
---
Halloween is fast approaching and our community enjoys creating costumes for the spooky festivities. Costumes can be purchased, made of repurposed clothing, made by hand, or a combination of all these methods. Investopedia reports that Americans are expected to spend as much as $104 per person on Halloween--about 11.6 billion dollars.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2230" width="50"  %}

University of Idaho costumers have also been hard at work creating the wardrobe for the cast of ["The Addams Family: A New Musical"](https://uidaho.edu/class/theatre/productions-and-events/addams-family) which is running this week.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2420" width="50"  %}

For "The Addams Family," the costume shop team dressed 18 actors, created two costumes for Wednesday, and Morticia, Fester, Grandma, and Pugsley had additional costume pieces that covered their primary costume.

Ginger Sorenson, the director of the costume department, worked with Rachel Herrick, the costume designer, to coordinate the team and assemble Herrick's designs. Herrick is a distance MFA student residing in Virginia and Zoomed in for regular meetings. She flew to Moscow to oversee fittings, technical rehearsals, and how her design functioned on stage. 

The shop has twenty-six people consisting of design assistants, drapers, and stichers as well as new costume faculty Abigail M. Coleman. There is also a six member wardrobe crew for the performances as well as hair and makeup designer Allen Hadley.

Sorenson noted some interesting challenges included a tear away skirt for Morticia and working with props artisans Macy Korsten and Natalie Wargi for the puppeteers' costume pieces.

Rather than a black cloak for Fester, Herrick designed a "navy blue one with silver embroidered luna moths, and a couched crescent moon scallop" which Sorenson constructed. She also built Wednesday's corset. After the run of show, the corset will be reused as a teaching tool for the Advanced Costume Technology Studio.  

Theatrical costumes are used for storytelling and informing an audience about a particular character. They must also be durable to last the run of show, rapid wardrobe changes, and daily washing. 

The University of Idaho has been staging theatrical productions almost since its beginning. An early show was "She Stoops to Conquer" directed by elocution instructor Aurelia Henry.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2419" width="50"  %}

Depending on the design of a play, the costumes can be historical, whimsical, and modern.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2412" width="50"  %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2418;lumber2413" width="100"  %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2416" width="100"  %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2417" width="50"  %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2414;lumber2411" width="100"  %}

The University of Idaho Library Special Collections and Archives holds a variety of collections that tell the history of the U of I Theatre Arts Department like the Edmund Chavez papers, University of Idaho Theatre Arts Department Records collection, 1983-2017, and the University of Idaho Theatre Arts Photographs, 1920-1976. Some production photos may be seen in our digital collections.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2415" %}

# Resources

[Edmund Chavez Performing Arts Center Papers, 1959-1976](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv20183)

[Investopedia](https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/102714/how-does-halloween-affect-economy.asp)

[University of Idaho Department of Theatre Arts](https://uidaho.edu/class/theatre/productions-and-events/addams-family)

[University of Idaho Theatre Arts Department Records collection, 1983-2017](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv731431)

[University of Idaho Theatre Arts Photographs, 1920-1976](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv884132)]