---
title: Building the Mullan Road
date: 2024-08-15
tags: []
subtitle: 
cover-image: lumber2367
categories: ["maps","Mullan Road","Day-NW"]
author: Ariana Burns
---
Special Collections and Archives cares for thousands of rare books that do not circulate like traditional library books but can be used by patrons in our Reading Room. The largest collection of rare books is known as the Day-Northwest Collection, named for Jerome J. Day. Day was a silver mining magnate, a State Senator for Latah County (1909-1912), and a University of Idaho Regent (1933-1941). Upon his death, Day's extensive personal library of books, some 3,000 volumes largely focused on Pacific Northwest history, were donated to the University of Idaho Library's rare book department.

Within the collection is *The Report on the Construction of a Military Road.* Built between 1859 and 1862 and nowadays known as the "Mullan Road," it was a 624-mile wagon road that passed through the Idaho Panhandle. A company led by Captain John Mullan surveyed and laid the road between Fort Benton, Montana and Fort Walla Walla, Washington. It connected the Great Plains to the Pacific Northwest.
 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2364" width="50"  %}

 Gustav Sohon served as illustrator, topographer, and interpreter on the project. His sketches and illustrations later were used to create the maps and charts of the topography in the final report. 

 {% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2366" width="100"  %}

Shown here are some pages from the report.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2365" width="100"  %}

The maps are attached to the book and much larger than the Archives' scanner can accomodate. It was necessary to scan the map in sections and then reassemble it digitally. The completed images show not only the fold lines on the map but the curves in the paper that the folds caused.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2362" width="100"  %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="lumber2363" width="100"  %}

# Resources

[Day Northwest (Day-NW) Book collection, circa 1800s - Present](https://archiveswest.orbiscascade.org/ark:80444/xv393143)

Report on the construction of a military road from Fort Walla-Walla to Fort Benton, Day Northwest (Day-NW) Book collection, UA963 .A5 1863

McDermott, Paul D. and Ronald E. Grim, [The Case of the Mullan Road](https://www.washingtonhistory.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/winter-2004-05_002.pdf), Washington State Historical Society. 

[Mullan Road](https://www.kcgov.us/607/Mullan-Road)